KEP: Support for peremption based on flavor order (#810)
kubernetes-sigs/kueue: keps/582-preempt-based-on-flavor-order/README.md

know that this has succeeded?
-->
- a mechanism to enable high level jobs preempt low level jobs before consider
  next resource flavor when scheduling

### Non-Goals

<!--
What is out of scope for this KEP? Listing non-goals helps to focus discussion
and make progress.
-->

## Proposal

<!--
This is where we get down to the specifics of what the proposal actually is.
This should have enough detail that reviewers can understand exactly what
you're proposing, but should not include things like API designs or
implementation. What is the desired outcome and how do we measure success?.
The "Design Details" section below is for the real
nitty-gritty.
-->

### User Stories (Optional)

<!--
Detail the things that people will be able to do if this KEP is implemented.
Include as much detail as possible so that people can understand the "how" of
the system. The goal here is to make this feel real for users without getting
bogged down.
-->

#### Story 1

As a Kueue administrator I want to ensure more important jobs running on more 
stable resources. This can happen in case that there are normal and spot instances
in my cluster. In this case I prefer my high priority jobs not running on spot 

> instances. If high priority jobs can preempt jobs in normal ecs before try spot instances,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
instances. If high priority jobs can preempt jobs in standard instances before trying spot instances,
```

stability can be achieved.

> My use case can be supported by set `flavorFungibility` to `BeforeNextFlavor`  in the Kueue configuration.

Author: 🙆‍♂️ thanks

For example, consider both security and how this will impact the larger
Kubernetes ecosystem.

How will security be reviewed, and by whom?

How will UX be reviewed, and by whom?

Consider including folks who also work outside the SIG or subproject.
-->

## Design Details

<!--
This section should contain enough information that the specifics of your
change are understandable. This may include API specs (though not always
required) or even code snippets. If there's any ambiguity about HOW your
proposal will be implemented, this is the place to discuss them.
-->

### Cluster Queue API

We extend the Cluster Queue API to introduce the new fields: flavorFungibility to opt-in and configure the new behavior.

```
type FlavorFungibility string

const (
	BeforeNextFlavor FlavorFungibility = "BeforeNextFlavor"
	AfterAllFlavors  FlavorFungibility = "AfterAllFlavors"
)

// ClusterQueuePreemption contains policies to preempt Workloads from this
// ClusterQueue or the ClusterQueue's cohort.
type ClusterQueuePreemption struct {
	...

	// +kubebuilder:default="AfterAllFlavors"
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Enum=BeforeNextFlavor;AfterAllFlavors

> 	FlavorFungibility FlavorFungibility `json:"flavorFungibility"`

Reviewer: I agree with the location of the new field, but I think the current name proposals are too obscure:

```yaml
preemption:
  flavorFungibility: BeforeNextFlavor
```

Do the words in this order give some idea of what is going to happen? I don't think they do.

Another thing to consider is whether the feature makes sense even if preemption is disabled, for example, by simply borrowing. Today the algorithm avoids borrowing if it would fit in the next flavor.
Should the policy for borrowing be the same as preemption?

Maybe, maybe not. WDYT?

Perhaps it should be the other way around:

```yaml
flavorFungibility:
  whenCanPreempt: Preempt | TryNextFlavor
  whenCanBorrow: Borrow | TryNextFlavor
```

Reviewer: cc @mwielgus 
for thoughts on API

Reviewer 2: +1 for @acondor proposal ("Preempt & Borrow")

Reviewer: I love the thinking :)
I had thought of something similar before, but standard questions about the APIs remain:

- How intuitive is it to users?
- How extensible can it be? Do we imagine other modes of fungibility in the future?
- Can we code this in a maintainable way?

Reviewer: > How intuitive is it to users?

Here is where real word use cases can inform our decisions. Please share if you have any.

Author: > * How intuitive is it to users?

The api maybe like this:
```
type FlavorFungibility string

const (
	Borrow FlavorFungibility = "Borrow"
	Preempt  FlavorFungibility = "Preempt"
        TryNextFlavor FlavorFungibility = "TryNextFlavor"
)
// ClusterQueuePreemption contains policies to preempt Workloads from this
// ClusterQueue or the ClusterQueue's cohort.
type ClusterQueuePreemption struct {
  ...
  // +kubebuilder:validation:UniqueItems=true
  // +kubebuilder:validation:Enum="Borrow,Preempt,TryNextFlavor"
  FlavorFungibility []FlavorFungibility `json:"flavorFungibility"`
}
```

First, I think a list can cover more usage scenarios. It can not only define which phase should take effect, but also define the order of these phase.
Then, if we support more fungibility, we can just add an option to the enum.

For example, it a cluster queue should not borrow before all flavors were considered, then we can write like this:
```
flavorFungibility:
  - preempt
  - tryNextFlavor
  - borrow
```
And if we want to preempt after all flavors were considered, we can write like this:
```
flavorFungibility:
  - borrow
  - tryNextFlavor
  - preempt
```
Or if we want to preempt current flavor if borrowing still not work, we can write like this:
```
flavorFungibility:
  - borrow
  - preempt
  - tryNextFlavor
```

Reviewer: What if the user removes `Borrow` or `Preempt`, but has cohorts and a preemption policy. Is borrowing or preemption disabled in this case? Could that be confusing?

Then I would like to see how this can be implemented. Is it a state machine? Do we program all the possible combinations?

I don't have the answers at this moment. Could you write some thoughts in the KEP?
Maybe list all the high level proposals we have already discussed in this thread and show the advantages or disadvantages.

In general I think it's useful to have these policies, we just need to be careful about the API (for users' sake) and implementation (so that the code doesn't end up like spaghetti)

}
```

> ### Schduling Process in Kueue

Reviewer: You will probably depend on #806.

Author: yes, I think so

Author: Great😄. I will complete this pr in this week.

For example, if cluster queue has 2 resource groups and workload has 1 podSet as the following:

```
...
  - coveredResources: ["cpu", "memory"]
    flavors:
    - name: "default-flavor1"
      resources:
      - name: "cpu"
        nominalQuota: 3 
      - name: "memory"
        nominalQuota: 600Mi 
    - name: "default-flavor2"
      resources:
      - name: "cpu"
        nominalQuota: 3 
      - name: "memory"
        nominalQuota: 600Mi 
  - coveredResources: ["gpu"]
    flavors:
    - name: "vendor1"
      resources:
      - name: "gpu"
        nominalQuota: 9  
    - name: "vendor2"
      resources:
      - name: "gpu"
        nominalQuota: 9  
---  
...
  podSets:
  - count: 3
    spec:
      containers:
      - ...
        resources:
          requests:
            cpu: "1"
            memory: 200Mi
            gpu: 1
```

> We will first try `default-flavor1` for cpu and memory resources. If `default-flavor1` doesn't fit, we try preempt in `default-flavor1`. If preemptor return preempt fail, we try to allocate resource in `default-flavor2`.

Reviewer 3: > If `default-flavor1` doesn't fit, we try preempt in `default-flavor1`. 

In this situation, what happens if we can preempt `default-flavor` but it only frees up resources for 2 pods?

Do we preempt `default-flavor` only If we can free up for all pods? Or, do we preempt `default-flavor` even if we can free up for part of the pods?

Author: currently we only allow one kind of resource use one flavor (because now there is only one flavor assignment for one kind of resource).
so I think in this pr we only preempt default-flavor only If we can free up resources for all pods.

Reviewer 3: > because now there is only one flavor assignment for one kind of resource

You're right. We probably should take this situation as another feature.

@alculquicondor @kerthcet Do you think creating an issue for this feature (AssignMultipleFlavorsToWorkload?) is worth it?

Reviewer: the preemption logic should not change.
With #806, we can check whether preemption could find enough candidates.
If it's not possible, then we go to the next flavor.

> Do you think creating an issue for this feature (AssignMultipleFlavorsToWorkload?) is worth it?

I don't think we should do this. In most scenarios, this could cause pods to land in very different places, with potentially higher network latency. Also, we can't enforce it, as we wouldn't be able to set node selectors for a subset of pods.

Reviewer 3: > I don't think we should do this. In most scenarios, this could cause pods to land in very different places, with potentially higher network latency. Also, we can't enforce it, as we wouldn't be able to set node selectors for a subset of pods.

That makes sense.

> We will pass preemptor to flavorAssigner and let flavorAssigner try to call public interface of preemptor to get candidate for certain podSet in current flavor if podSet can not find enough resources in current flavor.

Reviewer 4: How will the preemptor know  which flavors are wanted for each call?

Just as a note:  currently , the preemptor depends on flavorassigner , not the other way around.

Author: currently preemptor will find resource which need preemption in Do func:

https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/blob/e2cb8de09971359fb267dcca61d0eceb8863306b/pkg/scheduler/preemption/preemption.go#L77-L81

resPerFlv contains flavor info and resource name, we can modify preemptor to allow preemptor accept resPerFlv as argument directly.

we can can achieve this by moving `resourcesRequiringPreemption` and `totalRequestsForAssignment` to outside.

Reviewer: Please update based on #806

> ### Test Plan

Reviewer: Once we have some confidence over the API and algorithm design, please fill this up.

Author: Okay, I'll do that

<!--
Based on reviewers feedback describe what additional tests need to be added prior
implementing this enhancement to ensure the enhancements have also solid foundations.
-->

#### Unit Tests

<!--
In principle every added code should have complete unit test coverage, so providing
the exact set of tests will not bring additional value.
However, if complete unit test coverage is not possible, explain the reason of it
together with explanation why this is acceptable.
-->

<!--
Additionally, try to enumerate the core package you will be touching
to implement this enhancement and provide the current unit coverage for those
in the form of:
- <package>: <date> - <current test coverage>

This can inform certain test coverage improvements that we want to do before
extending the production code to implement this enhancement.
-->

- `pkg/cache`: `2023-8-22` - `82.9%`
- `pkg/scheduler`: `2023-8-22` - `80.7%`
- `pkg/webhook`: `2023-8-22` - `71.2%`
- `pkg/workload`: `2023-8-22` - `54.9%`

#### Integration tests

<!--
Describe what tests will be added to ensure proper quality of the enhancement.

After the implementation PR is merged, add the names of the tests here.
-->

> Should_Schedule_When_Fungibility_Is_Set

Reviewer: Can you describe a little the scenarios that you plan to test?

See for example https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/tree/main/keps/168-pending-workloads-visibility#integration-tests

...
  podSets:
  - count: 3
    spec:
      containers:
      - ...
        resources:
          requests:
            cpu: "1"
            memory: 200Mi
            gpu: 1
```

We will first try `default-flavor1` for cpu and memory resources. If `default-flavor1` doesn't fit, we try preempt in `default-flavor1`. If preemptor return preempt fail, we try to allocate resource in `default-flavor2`.

We will pass preemptor to flavorAssigner and let flavorAssigner try to call public interface of preemptor to get candidate for certain podSet in current flavor if podSet can not find enough resources in current flavor.

##### Advantages

##### Disadvantages

#### Plan B

```
type FlavorFungibility string

const (
  Borrow   FlavorFungibility = "Borrow"
  Preempt  FlavorFungibility = "Preempt"
  TryNextFlavor FlavorFungibility = "TryNextFlavor"
)

// ClusterQueuePreemption contains policies to preempt Workloads from this
// ClusterQueue or the ClusterQueue's cohort.
type ClusterQueuePreemption struct {
	...
  // +kubebuilder:validation:UniqueItems=true
  // +kubebuilder:validation:Enum="Borrow,Preempt,TryNextFlavor"
  FlavorFungibility []FlavorFungibility `json:"flavorFungibility"`
}
```

> Length of FlavorFungibility should be either 0 or 3, this means we don't allow users to omit any of these three actions. If FlavorFungibility is empty, we set FlavorFungibility as `Borrow,TryNextFlavor,Preempt`. Actions after `TryNextFlavor` will be executed after all flavors are considered, and actions before `TryNextFlavor` will be executed before next flavor be considered.

Reviewer: I like the idea that all the actions should be listed. However, I'm not aware of any k8s API that looks like this.

I started a thread on slack https://kubernetes.slack.com/archives/CJUQN3E4T/p1686161408595329

Are you sure all permutations are valid? For example, if we try to Borrow before Preempting, there could be priority inversion, similar to this: https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/pull/763#issuecomment-1551831935

Somehow `TryNextFlavor` is special. Should it be something like the following?

```yaml
beforeTryingNextFlavor: ["Preempt", "Borrow"]
```

Author: Currently we will borrow unused quota from other cluster queues before we try preempting. 
Do you mean we will change this behavior? 
If we can say that preemption always takes precedence over borrowing, I think plan A is better.

### Non-Goals

<!--
What is out of scope for this KEP? Listing non-goals helps to focus discussion
and make progress.
-->

## Proposal

<!--
This is where we get down to the specifics of what the proposal actually is.
This should have enough detail that reviewers can understand exactly what
you're proposing, but should not include things like API designs or
implementation. What is the desired outcome and how do we measure success?.
The "Design Details" section below is for the real
nitty-gritty.
-->

### User Stories (Optional)

<!--
Detail the things that people will be able to do if this KEP is implemented.
Include as much detail as possible so that people can understand the "how" of
the system. The goal here is to make this feel real for users without getting
bogged down.
-->

#### Story 1

As a Kueue administrator I want to ensure more important jobs running on more 
stable resources. This can happen in case that there are normal and spot instances
in my cluster. In this case I prefer my high priority jobs not running on spot 
instances. If high priority jobs can preempt jobs in standard instances before trying spot instances,
stability can be achieved.

> My use case can be supported by setting `flavorFungibility` to `BeforeNextFlavor`  in the Kueue configuration.

Reviewer: Still outdated

      - [Unit Tests](#unit-tests)
      - [Integration tests](#integration-tests)
    - [Graduation Criteria](#graduation-criteria)
  - [Implementation History](#implementation-history)
  - [Drawbacks](#drawbacks)
  - [Alternatives](#alternatives)
<!-- /toc -->

## Summary

<!--
This section is incredibly important for producing high-quality, user-focused
documentation such as release notes or a development roadmap. It should be
possible to collect this information before implementation begins, in order to
avoid requiring implementors to split their attention between writing release
notes and implementing the feature itself. KEP editors and SIG Docs
should help to ensure that the tone and content of the `Summary` section is
useful for a wide audience.

A good summary is probably at least a paragraph in length.

Both in this section and below, follow the guidelines of the [documentation
style guide]. In particular, wrap lines to a reasonable length, to make it
easier for reviewers to cite specific portions, and to minimize diff churn on
updates.

[documentation style guide]: https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/guide/style-guide.md
-->

> This proposal introduces an opt-in mechanism to preempt workloads based on the 
> order of flavors defined in cluster queue.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This proposal introduces an opt-in mechanism to borrow quota or preempt workloads in a flavor
before trying the next flavors in the ClusterQueue.
```

## Motivation

<!--
This section is for explicitly listing the motivation, goals, and non-goals of
this KEP.  Describe why the change is important and the benefits to users. The
motivation section can optionally provide links to [experience reports] to
demonstrate the interest in a KEP within the wider Kubernetes community.

[experience reports]: https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/ExperienceReports
-->

The order of ResourceFlavors within a ClusterQueue represents preference of 
consumption. Jobs with higher priorities sometimes prefer to consume resources
in preferred ResourceFlavors.

### Goals

<!--
List the specific goals of the KEP. What is it trying to achieve? How will we
know that this has succeeded?
-->

> - a mechanism to enable high priority jobs preempt low priority jobs using a flavor before considering the

Reviewer: or borrow

required) or even code snippets. If there's any ambiguity about HOW your
proposal will be implemented, this is the place to discuss them.
-->

### Cluster Queue API

We extend the Cluster Queue API to introduce the new fields: flavorFungibility to opt-in and configure the new behavior.

For each type of resource in each podSet, Kueue will traverse all resource groups and resource flavors to find a available flavor in present. When there are insufficient resources in the flavor, kueue will prioritize preemption or borrowing based on the configured policy. 

```
const (
	Borrow FlavorFungibilityPolicy = "Borrow"
	Preempt  FlavorFungibilityPolicy = "Preempt"
  TryNextFlavor FlavorFungibilityPolicy = "TryNextFlavor"
)

type FlavorFungibility struct {
  // +kubebuilder:validation:Enum="Borrow,TryNextFlavor"
  WhenCanBorrow FlavorFungibilityPolicy  `json:"whenCanBorrow"`
  // +kubebuilder:validation:Enum="Preempt,TryNextFlavor"
  WhenCanPreempt FlavorFungibilityPolicy `json:"whenCanPreempt"`
}

// ClusterQueuePreemption contains policies to preempt Workloads from this
// ClusterQueue or the ClusterQueue's cohort.
type ClusterQueuePreemption struct {
	...

> 	FlavorFungibility FlavorFungibility `json:"flavorFungibility"`

Reviewer: Let's put it outside of Preemption, directly on ClusterQueueSpec

}
```

If flavorFungibility is nil in configuration, we will set the `WhenCanBorrow` to `true` and set `WhenCanPreempt` to `false` to maintain consistency with the current behavior.

### Behavior Changes

We will not change the behavior to judge whether a podset can get enough resource in certain resource flavor. Preemption and admission will not be influenced also. We only change the order these flavors were considered.

After we try to schedule a podset in a resource flavor, we decide whether to traverse to the next flavor base on the `flavorFungibility` like the follows. This turn run to end if `shouldTryNextFlavor` return false, otherwise we try next flavor to find the best one. 
```

> func shouldTryNextFlavor(representativeMode FlavorAssignmentMode, flavorFungibility v1beta1.FlavorFungibility, whetherNeedBorrowing bool) bool {

Reviewer: Prefer to explain the idea, rather than code. Pseudocode is acceptable.

For example, if cluster queue has 2 resource groups and workload has 1 podSet as the following:

```
...
  - coveredResources: ["cpu", "memory"]
    flavors:
    - name: "default-flavor1"
      resources:
      - name: "cpu"
        nominalQuota: 3 
      - name: "memory"
        nominalQuota: 600Mi 
    - name: "default-flavor2"
      resources:
      - name: "cpu"
        nominalQuota: 3 
      - name: "memory"
        nominalQuota: 600Mi 
  - coveredResources: ["gpu"]
    flavors:
    - name: "vendor1"
      resources:
      - name: "gpu"
        nominalQuota: 9  
    - name: "vendor2"
      resources:
      - name: "gpu"
        nominalQuota: 9  
---  
...
  podSets:
  - count: 3
    spec:
      containers:
      - ...
        resources:
          requests:
            cpu: "1"
            memory: 200Mi
            gpu: 1
```

We will first try `default-flavor1` for cpu and memory resources. If `default-flavor1` doesn't fit, we try preempt in `default-flavor1`. And if we can not find enough candidates in `default-flavor1`, the workload will start from `default-flavor2` in the next time.

##### Advantages

> ##### Disadvantages

Reviewer: Remove if empty

> ### Implementation

Reviewer: Remove this

-->

[Y] I/we understand the owners of the involved components may require updates to
existing tests to make this code solid enough prior to committing the changes necessary
to implement this enhancement.

##### Prerequisite testing updates

<!--
Based on reviewers feedback describe what additional tests need to be added prior
implementing this enhancement to ensure the enhancements have also solid foundations.
-->

#### Unit Tests

<!--
In principle every added code should have complete unit test coverage, so providing
the exact set of tests will not bring additional value.
However, if complete unit test coverage is not possible, explain the reason of it
together with explanation why this is acceptable.
-->

<!--
Additionally, try to enumerate the core package you will be touching
to implement this enhancement and provide the current unit coverage for those
in the form of:
- <package>: <date> - <current test coverage>

This can inform certain test coverage improvements that we want to do before
extending the production code to implement this enhancement.
-->

- `<package>`: `<date>` - `<test coverage>`

> #### Integration tests

Reviewer: Please fill this up

proposal will be implemented, this is the place to discuss them.
-->

### Cluster Queue API

We extend the Cluster Queue API to introduce the new fields: flavorFungibility to opt-in and configure the new behavior.

For each type of resource in each podSet, Kueue will traverse all resource groups and resource flavors to find a available flavor in present. When there are insufficient resources in the flavor, kueue will prioritize preemption or borrowing based on the configured policy. 

```
const (
	Borrow FlavorFungibilityPolicy = "Borrow"
	Preempt  FlavorFungibilityPolicy = "Preempt"
  TryNextFlavor FlavorFungibilityPolicy = "TryNextFlavor"
)

type FlavorFungibility struct {
  // +kubebuilder:validation:Enum="Borrow,TryNextFlavor"
  WhenCanBorrow FlavorFungibilityPolicy  `json:"whenCanBorrow"`
  // +kubebuilder:validation:Enum="Preempt,TryNextFlavor"
  WhenCanPreempt FlavorFungibilityPolicy `json:"whenCanPreempt"`
}

// ClusterQueuePreemption contains policies to preempt Workloads from this
// ClusterQueue or the ClusterQueue's cohort.
type ClusterQueuePreemption struct {
	...
	FlavorFungibility FlavorFungibility `json:"flavorFungibility"`
}
```

> If flavorFungibility is nil in configuration, we will set the `WhenCanBorrow` to `true` and set `WhenCanPreempt` to `false` to maintain consistency with the current behavior.

Reviewer: looks outdated

Reviewer: Still outdated

> 

Reviewer: Explain what's the default policy, which should match the current behavior.

IIUC, the current behavior is:

```yaml
whenCanBorrow: Borrow
whenCanPreempt: TryNextFlavor
```

> ### Behavior Changes

Reviewer: What are the semantics with respect to Partial Admission?

We will not change the behavior to judge whether a podset can get enough resource in certain resource flavor. Preemption and admission will not be influenced also. We only change the order these flavors were considered.

After we try to schedule a podset in a resource flavor, we decide whether to traverse to the next flavor base on the `flavorFungibility` like the follows. This turn run to end if `shouldTryNextFlavor` return false, otherwise we try next flavor to find the best one. 
```
func shouldTryNextFlavor(representativeMode FlavorAssignmentMode, flavorFungibility v1beta1.FlavorFungibility, whetherNeedBorrowing bool) bool {
	policyPreempt := flavorFungibility.WhenCanPreempt
	policyBorrow := flavorFungibility.WhenCanBorrow
	if representativeMode == Preempt && policyPreempt == v1beta1.Preempt {
		return false
	}

	if representativeMode == Fit && whetherNeedBorrowing && policyBorrow == v1beta1.Borrow {
		return false
	}

	if representativeMode == Fit && !whetherNeedBorrowing {
		return false
	}

	return true
}
```

> We will store the scheduling context in workload info so that we can start from where we stop in previous scheduling attempts. This will be useful to avoid to waste time in one flavor all the time if we try to preempt in a flavor and failed. Scheduling context will contain the `LastScheduledFlavorIdx`, `ResourceFlavors` attached to the CQ, `ClusterQueueUsage` of the CQ and `CohortUsage`. Any changes to these properties will lead to a scheduling from the first flavor.

Reviewer: Some implementation detail: if the flavors in the CQ change, we should wipe the stored context. Maybe we can keep a hash to detect the changes.

For example, if cluster queue has 2 resource groups and workload has 1 podSet as the following:

```
...
  - coveredResources: ["cpu", "memory"]
    flavors:
    - name: "default-flavor1"
      resources:
      - name: "cpu"
        nominalQuota: 3 
      - name: "memory"
        nominalQuota: 600Mi 
    - name: "default-flavor2"
      resources:
      - name: "cpu"
        nominalQuota: 3 
      - name: "memory"
        nominalQuota: 600Mi 
  - coveredResources: ["gpu"]
    flavors:
    - name: "vendor1"
      resources:
      - name: "gpu"
        nominalQuota: 9  
    - name: "vendor2"
      resources:
      - name: "gpu"
        nominalQuota: 9  
---  
...
  podSets:
  - count: 3
    spec:
      containers:
      - ...
        resources:
          requests:
            cpu: "1"
            memory: 200Mi
            gpu: 1
```

We will first try `default-flavor1` for cpu and memory resources. If `default-flavor1` doesn't fit, we try preempt in `default-flavor1`. And if we can not find enough candidates in `default-flavor1`, the workload will start from `default-flavor2` in the next time.

##### Advantages

##### Disadvantages

### Implementation

```

> func assignFlavors(log logr.Logger, requests []workload.PodSetResources, podSets []kueue.PodSet, resourceFlavors map[kueue.ResourceFlavorReference]*kueue.ResourceFlavor, cq *cache.ClusterQueue, lastSchedule *workload.LastScheduleClusterQueueState) Assignment {

Reviewer: Remove the code here.
